History
                         
     The SaTScan system was originally developed several years ago by Dr. Martin Kulldorff
while he was a member of the Biometry Research Group of the National Cancer Institute's
Division of Cancer Prevention.  Its purpose is to evaluate spatial, temporal, or space-time point
data for statistical significance.  The scan statistic itself was also created by Dr. Kulldorff.  The
SaTScan system computerized this scan statistic for the following objectives: testing the statistical
significance of reported spatial or space-time disease clusters; detecting areas with statistically
high or low disease rates, also known as geographical surveillance; and testing whether a disease
is randomly distributed over space, over time, or over space and time.  The SaTScan system
performs its statistical calculation using one of three different probabilistic models.  The first is a 
Poisson-based model where the number of events is Poisson distributed under the null hypothesis. 
The second is a Bernoulli-based model with 0/1 event data such as cases and controls.  The last
model is a space-time permutation model which evaluates case data for space-time interaction
clusters.  This model was not available in the earliest versions of SaTScan.  With all of these
models, the system adjusts for the underlying in homogeneity of the population.  And, with the
Poisson model, the system can also adjust for a number of covariates as specified by the user.
     The first version of SaTScan was developed by Information Management Services, Inc.
(IMS) in 1994 from Dr. Kulldorff's proof of concept pseudo code.  It was a command-line
program written in the C language for use in DOS.  The system then evolved under IMS's
direction to include a graphical user interface (GUI).  The GUI allowed users to easily input all
the parameters for an analysis, and then invoked the command line program for computation of
the statistic.  The current version of the program is only slightly less separated than its
predecessor.  The GUI still allows the user to easily input the parameters required for an analysis. 
The application then prepares a parameter file and starts the calculation engine which uses that
parameter file.  The code for the calculation engine can be compiled separately from the GUI to
create a command line program if desired.
     The SaTScan system is currently being used for similar problems in a variety of other
fields both related and unrelated to the original cancer surveillance purpose.  These areas include
biology, ecology, history, economics, and astronomy.  While there is widespread interest in the
current system, there is perhaps greater interest in a system that can provide real-time surveillance
of infectious disease outbreaks.  Dr. Kulldorff, with help from NYCDOH, has already made some
modifications to his statistical approach so the system could be used for surveillance of the West
Nile virus, influenza, and bioterrorism.  Further adaptations are required for the desired real-time
surveillance.  There are few other existing software programs available to researchers and health
departments for the detection of infectious disease outbreaks and bioterrorist attacks.  The past
year has demonstrated the need, and hence the demand, for this type of surveillance.  The goal,
then, of improving and expanding the current version of the SaTScan system is to provide this
type of disease surveillance so that it can be distributed to health departments both nationally and
internationally at little or no cost.